---
layout: archive
title: "Research summary (lead-author postdoc publications in comp bio)"
permalink: /research/
author_profile: true
---

{% if author.googlescholar %}
  You can also find my articles on <u><a href="{{author.googlescholar}}">my Google Scholar profile</a>.</u>
{% endif %}

{% include base_path %}

{% for post in site.publications reversed %}
  {% include archive-single.html %}
{% endfor %}

<b>1. Problem statement:</b> A local transient increase in calcium in the dendritic spines of pyramidal neurons (sites where synaptic contacts are made onto the target cell) is a key trigger for the induction of activity-dependent synaptic plasticity, which is thought to underlie memory encoding in the brains of mammals. Most accounts of plasticity at excitatory synapses only consider postsynaptic calcium entry via NMDA/voltage-gated surface receptors. However, an additional significant source of local calcium exists in the form of endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stores in pyramidal neuron dendrites. The dendritic ER is preferentially found extended into the larger dendritic spines, and experiments suggest an association of ER stores with metabotropic receptor-dependent synaptic depression. However, the broader involvement of this prominent multifunctional neuronal organelle, as an intracellular calcium store, in synaptic plasticity regulation has remained unclear; this question takes on particular relevance given the emerging links between ER calcium de-regulation and the early progression of synaptic deficits in Alzheimer’s disease.
<br><br><b>Research contribution:</b> To address the detailed biophysics of local calcium dynamics at synapses, I developed and analyzed a physiologically detailed computational model of an ER-containing dendrite spine. This model integrates the relevant kinetic pathways describing synaptically activated calcium-calmodulin signaling, specifically characterizing the contribution of the ER to microscope signaling via IP3 receptor-mediated calcium release (metabotropic glutamate receptor pathway) and buffering (SERCA pumps). Our simulations of plasticity experiments suggest a graded contribution of the ER calcium store to the NMDAR-dependent plasticity profile, selectively promoting long-term synaptic depression with relatively diminished effect on potentiation. Overall, this differential plasticity modulation by the ER predicts a ‘braking’ mechanism that may play a stabilizing role and restrain runaway strengthening at previously potentiated synapses, which are typically associated with ER-bearing spines. More recently, we have extended our study to considering the contributions of Ryanodine-gated receptors on the ER membrane, and store-operated calcium entry (SOCE pathway) to synaptic plasticity. Our work highlighted a crucial functional contribution of the ER to regulating the long-term dynamics of synapse strength, esp. at the stronger synapses, and makes novel predictions about its larger role in enhancing the overall storage capacity of a population of these synapses. Overall, our experimentally-grounded model underlines the importance of including details of microphysiology into computational descriptions of synapse-level computation, and sets up a basis for further modeling studies into the fundamental roles of calcium release from stores in neuronal dendrites, e.g. in (1) coordinated plasticity regulation across proximal synapses (heterosynaptic plasticity), and (2) long range hetero-synaptic interactions mediated by regenerative calcium signaling (dendritic calcium wave propagation).
<br>[Paper + code](https://doi.org/10.1113/JP277726)

<b>2. Problem statement:</b> Energy usage and information processing are considered fundamental constraints on the structure and function of neuronal networks. It is unclear if energetic efficiency as a general design principle applies on the level of individual synapses. Overall, chemical synaptic transmission imposes significant metabolic demands during neural activity, and past work has suggested metabolic efficiency at sensory pathway synapses. However, it is not known if similar feature is shared by synapses in the cortex and hippocampus. Given considerable diversity in synapse types across the brain and the functional contexts they operate in, questions about design principles need to be addressed in a synapse-specific manner, taking into account their local activity context and transmission properties.
<br><br><b>Research contribution:</b> We asked how information coding and energy utilization shape the form-function relationship of single synapse transmission dynamics at Schaffer collateral excitatory synapses, a functionally important synapse in the mammalian hippocampus that is associated with learning. These synapses are unreliable (low probability of neurotransmitter release) while also exhibiting distinct use-dependent short-term plasticity (activity-driven facilitation) on timescales of < 1 s. Using biophysically-motivated computational modeling to quantify the transmission of realistic patterns of CA3 action potential generation, we found that individual synapses do not maximize energetic efficiency (unlike previous findings at sensory pathways), but are near-optimal for information coding via vesicular release. Further, we showed that physiological facilitation not only improves the fidelity of unreliable synapses, but crucially also ensures synapses with widely different initial release probabilities carry information at comparable rates (invariance). Altogether, our results suggest that the ‘vesicle code’ governing transmission at CA3 synapses operates within a range which optimizes information rate, while still keeping costs low (sharing similarity with performance tradeoffs found in fly/mammal retina design). Our analysis, which is the first to address design trade-offs at a facilitating synapse, underlines the relevance of fundamental constraints in shaping distinctive synapse-specific features of neurotransmission.
<br>[Paper + code](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/32847867/)

<b>3. Problem statement:</b> Functional genomics experiments such as microarrays and RNA-seq yield large scale profiles of gene expression changes between conditions, reflecting cellular reorganization during adaptation, differentiation, or disease. A key step in the analysis and interpretation of such profiles is to infer the upstream regulators (transcription factors/TFs) whose differential activity can best account for these changes. Existing approaches typically apply statistical enrichment tests to rank TFs according to the association of their target gene set with the differentially expressed genes. Such methods, which evaluate TFs in an individual manner, may be inadequate or lead to spurious inferences when transcriptomic changes arise from concurrent up/down regulation of activity of multiple TFs.
<br><br><b>Research contribution:</b> We proposed a generalized computational approach to infer such a set of differentially active TFs, by combining differential expression profiles with pre- assembled TF regulatory networks. Conceptually, our method identifies the optimal subset of TFs with maximal collective association of their targets with the differentially regulated gene set, in contrast to testing TFs one at a time. As a combinatorially large number of possible TF groupings precludes ranking-based identification of the optimal subset, we proposed and evaluated greedy methods to find a ‘good’ solution. These approximate methods (particularly suitable for large meta-analyses) were benchmarked with respect to random search and stochastic (simulated annealing-based) methods on microarray expression profiles for <i>E. coli</i>. Our analysis demonstrates improved recovery of candidate regulators with our approach as applied to previously published <i>E. coli</i>. and <i>M. tuberculosis</i> genome-wide expression datasets, as well as on simulated differential expression profiland in particular, it mitigates bias in inference for TFs with larger target gene sets. Our approach should be a valuable contribution to gene expression analysis workflows, as it provides a crucial step to link experimental observations to biologically meaningful hypotheses about the underlying causative molecular pathways. The method may be extended to account for TF-TF interactions (co-regulation), or have scoring functions that also account for additional details, such as TF-promoter binding affinities.
<br>[Paper + code](https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0142147)

<b>4. Problem statement:</b> Mapping of the protein interactome between host and pathogen proteomes is an important goal toward understanding the molecular basis of infection and disease progression, as well identifying potential therapeutic targets. Computational prediction of protein-protein interactions (PPIs) can complement and contribute to experimental studies toward this end. Several existing prediction methods rely on sequence-based analysis of similarities between proteins (sequence homology) and existing PPI information. However, both local and global sequence alignment, basis for such methods, imply limitations on accurate identification of novel candidate interactions, and may lead to either substantial proportion of false positives or miss out on potential interactions.
<br><br><b>Research contribution:</b> We systematically evaluated the limitations of local sequence alignment for inference of candidate PPIs. To mitigate these caveats we proposed a data- integration approach to prioritize potential host-pathogen protein-protein interactions that combines structure with sequence information. Our approach relies on experimentally identified interacting regions in existing Protein Data Bank (PDB) protein complexes, and these serve as templates for targeted scoring of potential interactions between host and microbe proteins. This strategy reduces chances of spurious predictions. We applied our methodology to identify novel candidate interactions for the human pathogen <i>M. tuberculosis</i>. To expand the possible search space, information from PDB was integrated with existing data on conserved interactions (‘interologs’ of template proteins). The prioritized PPI candidates were then filtered by combining with protein metadata (cellular localization, disease association, functional annotations, etc.) to rank them according to their plausibility and evaluate their functional relevance. Our bioinformatics analysis underlines limitations of existing sequence alignment and domain-based PPI search methods. Altogether, our approach provides a more informed application of sequence alignment toward an efficient, scalable and high-specificity method for protein interaction prediction between species based on “sequence mimicry”, by leveraging existing PPI and structural data as priors. More recently, we have extended our approach to include structure-based protein descriptors for improved predictions, esp. to better handle structural mimicry (evolutionary convergence with little sequence similarity) in protein comparisons.
<br>[Paper + code](https://doi.org/10.1186/s12859-017-1550-y)
